# CarND-Path-Planning-Project
Self-Driving Car Engineer Nanodegree Program
   
### Goals

#### The goals for this project are:
1. Safely navigate around a virtual highway with other traffic that is driving +/-10 MPH of the 50 MPH speed limit. The car's localization and sensor fusion data is provided, and there is also a sparse map list of waypoints around the highway. 
2. The car should try to go as close as possible to the 50 MPH speed limit, which means passing slower traffic when possible, noting that other cars will try to change lanes too. 
3. The car should avoid hitting other cars at all costs, as well as drive inside of the marked road lanes at all times unless when the car is changing lanes. 
4. The car should be able to make one complete loop around the 6946 meters highway. Since the car is trying to go 50 MPH, it should take a little over 5 minutes to complete 1 loop. 
5. The car should not experience total acceleration over 10 m/s^2 and jerk that is greater than 10 m/s^3, in order to ensure a smooth ride.

### Code Model for generating paths

#### Ensure the car stays in its lane with constant velocity and moves forward smoothly: 
I started with using five anchor points. Two points are generated by either using the car's position as the starting reference or the previous path's end points (lines 330-356 of main.cpp). The next three points are evenly spaced (30m) points ahead of the starting reference. These points further have the co-ordinates to ensure that the car stays in the middle of the lane. The path planning points are generated with a spline using the anchor points to predict the path planning points, and they are spaced in such as way that the desired velocity is reached in a smooth fashion (lines 382-425).

#### Ensure that the car doesn't collide with other cars in the lane: 
Using the sensor fusion data for all cars, I checked if the ego car is close to other cars on the road in each of the lanes. If other cars are too close to the ego car, then I make sure that the ego car slows down to prevent a collision (lines 247-270 & lines 300-301).

#### Change lanes when it is safe to do so: 
I accomplished this by first checking if the ego car is too close to the car ahead in the same lane. If so, I then check if there are cars closeby in the adjacent lanes. If there are no cars closeby in the adjacent lanes, I make a turn into the right or left lane accordingly by avoiding the lane which has cars closeby (lines 300-316).

#### Ensure that there is no jerky motion and that speed limit is not violated: 
By starting the reference velocity at zero and slowly increasing the velocity, I ensured that there is no sudden acceleration. I further limited the maximum speed to 49.5mph to stay under the maximum speed limit (lines 300-301 & 317-319).

#### The end result video that passes all the project rubric criteria can be viewed [here](https://youtu.be/wHqrpRF8FT4)

---

### Simulator.
You can download the Term3 Simulator which contains the Path Planning Project from the [releases](https://github.com/udacity/self-driving-car-sim/releases).

#### The map of the highway is in data/highway_map.txt
Each waypoint in the list contains  [x,y,s,dx,dy] values. x and y are the waypoint's map coordinate position, the s value is the distance along the road to get to that waypoint in meters, the dx and dy values define the unit normal vector pointing outward of the highway loop.


The highway's waypoints loop around so the frenet s value, distance along the road, goes from 0 to 6945.554.

## Basic Build Instructions

1. Clone this repo.
2. Make a build directory: `mkdir build && cd build`
3. Compile: `cmake .. && make`
4. Run it: `./path_planning`.

Here is the data provided from the Simulator to the C++ Program

#### Main car's localization Data (No Noise)

["x"] The car's x position in map coordinates

["y"] The car's y position in map coordinates

["s"] The car's s position in frenet coordinates

["d"] The car's d position in frenet coordinates

["yaw"] The car's yaw angle in the map

["speed"] The car's speed in MPH

#### Previous path data given to the Planner

//Note: Return the previous list but with processed points removed, can be a nice tool to show how far along
the path has processed since last time. 

["previous_path_x"] The previous list of x points previously given to the simulator

["previous_path_y"] The previous list of y points previously given to the simulator

#### Previous path's end s and d values 

["end_path_s"] The previous list's last point's frenet s value

["end_path_d"] The previous list's last point's frenet d value

#### Sensor Fusion Data, a list of all other car's attributes on the same side of the road. (No Noise)

["sensor_fusion"] A 2d vector of cars and then that car's [car's unique ID, car's x position in map coordinates, car's y position in map coordinates, car's x velocity in m/s, car's y velocity in m/s, car's s position in frenet coordinates, car's d position in frenet coordinates. 

## Details

1. The car uses a perfect controller and will visit every (x,y) point it recieves in the list every .02 seconds. The units for the (x,y) points are in meters and the spacing of the points determines the speed of the car. The vector going from one point to the next in the list dictates the angle of the car. Acceleration both in the tangential and normal directions is measured along with the jerk, the rate of change of total Acceleration. The (x,y) point paths that the planner recieves should not have a total acceleration that goes over 10 m/s^2, also the jerk should not go over 50 m/s^3. 

2. There will be some latency between the simulator running and the path planner returning a path, with optimized code usually its not very long maybe just 1-3 time steps. During this delay the simulator will continue using points that it was last given, because of this its a good idea to store the last points you have used so you can have a smooth transition. previous_path_x, and previous_path_y can be helpful for this transition since they show the last points given to the simulator controller with the processed points already removed. You would either return a path that extends this previous path or make sure to create a new path that has a smooth transition with this last path.

## Tips

A really helpful resource for doing this project and creating smooth trajectories was using http://kluge.in-chemnitz.de/opensource/spline/, the spline function is in a single header file is really easy to use.

---

## Dependencies

* cmake >= 3.5
 * All OSes: [click here for installation instructions](https://cmake.org/install/)
* make >= 4.1
  * Linux: make is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: [install Xcode command line tools to get make](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: [Click here for installation instructions](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/make.htm)
* gcc/g++ >= 5.4
  * Linux: gcc / g++ is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: same deal as make - [install Xcode command line tools]((https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: recommend using [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/)
* [uWebSockets](https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets)
  * Run either `install-mac.sh` or `install-ubuntu.sh`.
  * If you install from source, checkout to commit `e94b6e1`, i.e.
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets 
    cd uWebSockets
    git checkout e94b6e1
    ```




